=head1 NAME

mod_auth_tkt - apache ticket authentication module

=head1 DESCRIPTION

mod_auth_tkt is a lightweight cookie-based authentication module,
written in C, for apache versions 1.3.x, 2.0.x, and 2.2.x It 
implements a single-signon framework that works across multiple 
apache instances, different apache versions, and multiple machines.

mod_auth_tkt itself is completely repository-agnostic, as the actual
authentication is done by a user-supplied CGI or script in your
language of choice (examples are provided in Perl, with contrib
libraries for use with python and PHP). This allows authentication 
against virtually any kind of user repository you can imagine 
(password files, ldap directories, databases, etc.)

mod_auth_tkt supports inactivity timeouts (including the ability to
control how aggressively the ticket is refreshed), the ability to
include arbitrary user data within the cookie, configurable cookie
names and domains, token-based access to subsections of a site, and
optional 'guest' access for unauthenticated users.

=head1 CONFIGURATION

mod_auth_tkt is configured in your apache configuration files
using the following set of directives (all mod_auth_tkt directives
begin with 'TKTAuth'):

=head2 Server Directives

mod_auth_tkt requires one apache server-level directive - the shared 
secret used for digest hashing. May be global or specific to a virtual 
host.

=over 4

=item TKTAuthSecret <secret>

String - the secret used for digest hashing. This should be kept secret 
and changed periodically. e.g.

  TKTAuthSecret "w b@5b15#664038f.f9d8U19b7e25 664eY9ad2%4393e,a2ef"

=back

=head2 Directory Directives

All directory-level directives are optional, except that either 
TKTAuthLoginURL or TKTAuthGuestLogin (or both) must be set to cause 
mod_auth_tkt to be invoked for a particular directory. As usual,
directory-level directives may be set in Directory or Location
sections, or in .htaccess files.

=over 4

=item AuthType None / require <users>

mod_auth_tkt requires the following standard apache authentication 
directives to trigger authentication:

  AuthType None
  require valid-user      # or require user1, user2, etc.

=item TKTAuthLoginURL <url>

Standard URL to which unauthenticated users are redirected.
This is a required directive unless you are using guest mode
via 'TKTAuthGuestLogin on'. e.g.

  TKTAuthLoginURL https://www.example.com/auth/login.cgi

=item TKTAuthTimeoutURL <url>

URL to which users are redirected in the event their ticket times
out. Default: TKTAuthLoginURL. e.g.

  TKTAuthTimeoutURL https://www.example.com/auth/login.cgi?timeout=1

=item TKTAuthPostTimeoutURL <url>

URL to which users are redirected in the event their ticket times
out during a POST operation. This case is distinguished to allow
you to handle such cases specially - you probably don't want to 
redirect back to the referrer after login, for instance.
Default: TKTAuthTImeoutURL. e.g.

  TKTAuthPostTimeoutURL https://www.example.com/auth/login.cgi?posttimeout=1

=item TKTAuthUnauthURL <url>

URL to which users are redirected in the event that they are not
authorised for a particular area e.g. incorrect tokens. 

  TKTAuthUnauthURL https://www.example.com/auth/login.cgi?unauth=1

=item TKTAuthGuestLogin <boolean>

Flag to turn on 'guest' mode, which means that any user without a 
valid ticket is authenticated anyway as the TKTAuthGuestUser user.
This is useful for allowing public access for guests and robots,
while allowing more personalised or privileged access for users 
who login. Default: off. e.g.

  TKTAuthGuestLogin on

=item TKTAuthGuestCookie <boolean>

Flag to indicate whether or not to issue a ticket cookie for guest
users. Issuing a cookie is primarily useful where you are using
UUID-ed guest users where you want them to keep the initial guest
username you issue them for tracking purposes. e.g.

  TKTAuthGuestCookie on

Default is 'off', unless you use a TKTAuthGuestUser with a UUID
(see next), in which case it's 'on'. Setting explicitly is
recommended, however.

=item TKTAuthGuestUser <string>

Username to be used for the guest user (in the ticket uid, 
REMOTE_USER environment variable, etc). 

On apache 2.0.x and 2.2.x (but not on apache 1.3.x), the
TKTAuthGuestUser may also contain a special sprintf-like
pattern '%U', which is expanded to 36-character UUID, allowing
individualised guest usernames. The %U may also include an
integer <= 36 to limit the number of characters used in the 
UUID e.g. %12U, %20U etc.

Default: 'guest'. Examples:

  TKTAuthGuestUser visitor
  TKTAuthGuestUser guest-%12U

=item TKTAuthGuestFallback <boolean>

Flag to indicate that a timed out user ticket should automatically
fallback to 'guest' status, and issue a new guest ticket, instead 
of redirecting to the TKTAuthTimeoutURL. Only makes sense with 
TKTAuthGuestLogin on, of course.

Default: off.

=item TKTAuthTimeout <seconds>

The ticket timeout period, in seconds. After this period, the ticket
is considered stale, and the user is redirected to the 
TKTAuthTimeoutURL (if set, else to the TKTAuthLoginURL). Note that
the ticket can be automatically refreshed, however, using the next
setting.

The following units can also be specified on the timeout (with no
spaces between timeout and unit): y/years, M/months, w/weeks, d/days, 
h/hours, m/minutes, and s/seconds.

This timeout is protected by the ticket hashing, so cannot be 
trivially modified, unlike the TKTAuthCookieExpires setting below.

Setting TKTAuthTimeout to 0 means never timeout, but this is strongly
discouraged, as it allows for trivial replay attacks. Set it to a
week or two if you really don't want timeouts.

Default: 2h. Examples:

  TKTAuthTimeout 86400
  TKTAuthTimeout 1w
  TKTAuthTimeout 1w 4d 3h

=item TKTAuthTimeoutRefresh <decimal>

A number between 0 and 1 indicating whether and how to refresh ticket
timestamps. 0 means never refresh (hard timeouts). 1 means refresh
tickets every time. .33 (for example) means refresh if less than .33
of the timeout period remains. 

This is a politeness setting for those paranoid types who have their 
browsers set to confirm all cookies - refreshing every time quickly
becomes VERY tedious. Default: 0.5. e.g.

  TKTAuthTimeoutRefresh 0.66

=item TKTAuthCookieName <name>

The name used for the ticket cookie. Default: 'auth_tkt'.

=item TKTAuthDomain <domain>

The domain to use in ticket cookies, which defines the hosts for 
which the browser will submit this cookie. Default: the apache
ServerName (either global or for a specific virtual host).

=item TKTAuthCookieExpires <seconds>

B<NB:> This directive is not currently supported on apache 1.3.x!

The period until the cookie expires, used to set the 'expires'
field on the ticket cookie, in seconds. This is useful if you want
cookies to persist across browser sessions (and your login script
must support it too, of course). 

The following units can also be specified on the expiry period 
(with no spaces between period and unit): y/years, M/months, 
w/weeks, d/days, h/hours, m/minutes, and s/seconds.

Note that his is a B<client-side> setting and is not protected by 
the ticket hashing, so you should always set a TKTAuthTimeout in
addition to using an expiry. Cookie expiries are refreshed with
tickets if TKTAuthTimeoutRefresh is set.

Default: none. Examples:

  TKTAuthCookieExpires 86400
  TKTAuthCookieExpires 1w
  TKTAuthCookieExpires 1w 3d 4h

=item TKTAuthBackArgName <name>

The name used for the back GET parameter. If this is set, mod_auth_tkt 
will add a GET parameter to all redirect URLs containing a URI-escaped 
version of the current requested page e.g. if the requested page is 
http://www.example.com/index.html and TKTAuthBackArgName is set to 
'back', mod_auth_tkt will add a parameter like:

  back=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.example.com%2Findex.html

to the TKTAuthLoginURL it redirects to, allowing your login script
to redirect back to the requested page upon successful login.
Default: 'back'.

=item TKTAuthBackCookieName <name>

The cookie name to use for the back cookie. If this is set,
mod_auth_tkt will set a back cookie containing a URI-escaped version
of current requested page when redirecting (see TKTAuthBackArgName
above). Default: none.

=item TKTAuthToken <token>

String indicating a required token for the given location, implementing
a simple form of token-based access control. If the user's ticket does
not contain one or more of the required tokens in the ticket token list
then mod_auth_tkt will redirect to the TKTAuthUnauthURL location (or
TKTAuthLoginURL if not set). Your login script is expected to set the
appropriate token list up at login time, of course.

Note that this directive can be repeated, and the semantics are that
B<any> of the required tokens is sufficient for access i.e. the tokens
are ORed.

Default: none. e.g.

  TKTAuthToken finance
  TKTAuthToken admin


=item TKTAuthIgnoreIP <boolean>

Flag indicating that mod_auth_tkt should ignore the client IP 
address in authenticating tickets (your login script must support
this as well, setting the client IP address to 0.0.0.0). This is
often required out on the open internet, especially if you are 
using an HTTPS login page (as you should) and are dealing with 
more than a handful of users (the typical problem being 
transparent HTTP proxies at ISPs). Default: 'off' i.e. ticket
is only valid from the originating IP address. e.g.

  TKTAuthIgnoreIP on

=item TKTAuthRequireSSL <boolean>

Flag used to indicate that tickets should be refused except in 
SSL/HTTPS protected contexts (redirects to TKTAuthLoginURL if
not, which presumably would be using HTTPS). Default: 'off' 
(B<don't> require SSL). e.g.

  TKTAuthRequireSSL on

See also TKTAuthCookieSecure below.

=item TKTAuthCookieSecure <boolean>

Flag used to set the 'secure' flag on all ticket cookies issued,
indicating to the browser that they should only be sent in 
SSL/HTTPS protected contexts. Default: 'off' (B<don't> set
'secure' flag). e.g.

  TKTAuthCookieSecure on

TKTAuthRequireSSL and TKTAuthCookieSecure are normally used
together. One case where it makes sense to use them separately
is where you are proxying through a separate SSL-equipped reverse
proxy, where you would want to use TKTAuthCookieSecure by itself
(since the proxied request will never be via SSL).

=item TKTAuthDebug <integer>

Turn on mod_auth_tkt debug output messages in your error log, with 
verbosity increasing with higher integer values. Current range: 1-3. 

Note that you will also require apache 'LogLevel debug' set to
see these messages.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

Minimal config using logins:

  <Location /secret1>
    AuthType None
    require valid-user
    TKTAuthLoginURL https://www.example.com/auth/login.cgi
  </Location>

Minimal config using guest logins (users can still login explicitly, of 
course):

  <Location /secret2>
    AuthType None
    require valid-user
    TKTAuthGuestLogin on
  </Location>

Example internet configuration:

  <Location /secret3>
    AuthType None
    require valid-user
    TKTAuthLoginURL https://www.example.com/auth/login.cgi
    TKTAuthTimeoutURL https://www.example.com/auth/login.cgi?timeout=1
    TKTAuthPostTimeoutURL https://www.example.com/auth/login.cgi?timeout=1&post=1
    TKTAuthIgnoreIP on
    TKTAuthTimeout 2h
    TKTAuthCookieExpires 2h
  </Location>

Example intranet configuration:

  <Location /secret4>
    AuthType None
    require valid-user
    TKTAuthGuestLogin on
    TKTAuthLoginURL https://www.example.com/auth/login.cgi
    TKTAuthTimeoutURL https://www.example.com/auth/login.cgi?timeout=1
    TKTAuthPostTimeoutURL https://www.example.com/auth/login.cgi?timeout=1&post=1
    TKTAuthTimeout 4h
    TKTAuthCookieExpires 4h
  </Location>


=head1 SUPPORT

Support is available on the mod_auth_tkt mailing list, courtesy of
sourceforge:

=over 4

=item List

modauthtkt-users@lists.sourceforge.net

=item List Page and Signup

https://lists.sourceforge.net/lists/listinfo/modauthtkt-users

=item List Archive 

http://sourceforge.net/mailarchive/forum.php?forum=modauthtkt-users

=back


=head1 BUGS

Ticket payload should include IP address, to make debugging IP address 
problems easier.


=head1 AUTHOR

Gavin Carr <gavin@openfusion.com.au>

=head1 LICENCE

mod_auth_tkt is licensed under the terms of the Apache Licence.


